---
layout: post
title:  "Learn Vue With Me: An introduction"
date:   2018-09-14 14:52:18 +0200
categories: LVWM
permalink: LVWM/introduction
---

<p class="lead">I wanted to learn Vue, and figured I should learn this through _a never done before_ way. I'll write my own tutorial as I am learning.
This should be interesting to me, and it might even be interesting to you as a reader.</p>
<!--more-->

## What will I create
I really didn't want to create another todo app, or a simple hello world series.

What I wanted is to start a series of tutorials, which I hope to do at a regular time, that will be expandable in the future as I want to explore new things.

To make this possible, I set my goals to creating a chat application. This series I'll be focussed on the frontend, so the backend will be a real simple
node-server that does realtime messaging over websockets. I'll be using docker-compose to set up the entire thing, making development easy without needing to
install a whole lot of packages onto my actual machine.

## Let's get started
This first episode is going to be _really basic_. I'll show and explain how I used **docker for a development environment**, and how I use **Webpack to package the front-end app**. No actual code is going to be written in this episode. So if you're already above that level of knowledge, and the second episode isn't live yet...

I'm sorry, you'll have to come again later.

### Requirements
* [Docker](https://www.docker.com/get-started)
* [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/) this comes with Docker for windows / docker for mac
* [GIT](https://git-scm.com/)

Get the repo by running: `git clone https://github.com/pjetr/Learn-Vue-With-Me.git`

## Fire it up
From the root of the folder, run: `docker-compose up -d` and wait for it to complete building, once it's done, go to [localhost:8888](http://localhost:8888).

As expected, you'll now have a nice **404 Not Found**.

Go into the frontend folder, and run `npm install` followed by an `npm run build`. Now refresh your page.

## How the what the why
### Docker-Compose.yml

As you can see there's a whole lot in there that is not yet used. But this is the stack I wish to use for the entire app for this series.

{% highlight yml %}
version: '3'
services:
  database:
    image: postgres:alpine
    restart: always
    ports:
      - "5432"
    environment:
      POSTGRES_PASSWORD: root
      POSTGRES_USER: root
    networks:
      - LVWM.network
  server:
    image: node:alpine
    volumes:
      - ./backend/server:/www
    working_dir: /www
    networks:
      - LVWM.network
  cache:
    image: redis:alpine
    ports:
      - "6379"
    networks:
      - LVWM.network
  nginx:
    image: nginx:alpine
    ports:
      - "8888:80"
    volumes:
      - ./conf/nginx.conf:/etc/nginx/conf.d/default.conf
      - ./frontend:/www
    working_dir: /www
    networks:
      - LVWM.network
volumes:
  database-storage:
networks:
  LVWM.network:
{% endhighlight %}

#### Database
I picked a [postgres](https://www.postgresql.org/) database to store our conversations, messages and users in. Why not mongo / MYsql / MariaDB / ... ?

Well basically because I have never worked with PostgreSQL, and I don't really like NOSQL solutions. Technically this could well be done by a NOSQL database, and it would have worked perfectly fine.

You'll see there's a _volume_ called database-storage which isn't mapped to a local folder. This is where the database will store it's files. We want this folder mapped to a local volume, but the default one is fine, since this doesn't need to be in the repository.

If we wouldn't map this to a local volume, all files of the database would be dropped as soon as you would stop your container. Which is not ideal for a database...

#### Server
The server will be a nodeJS server, but none is present as of yet, so this won't do a whole lot of good.

#### Cache
For cache I picked [Redis](https://redis.io/) which is a really fast data store.

#### Webserver
Nginx, because this is my goto webserver. It's about 2.5 times faster than apache and uses less RAM.

### Frontend
#### Webpack
We'll use [Webpack](https://webpack.js.org/) to bundle our application into 3 files (HTML, CSS and Javascript).

Let's explore the configuration:

{% highlight js %}
{
  mode: 'development',
  devtool: 'inline-source-map',
  entry: {
    main: './src/index.ts'
  },
  output: {
    path: path.resolve(__dirname, 'public_html'),
    publicPath: '/',
    filename: '[name].js',
    chunkFilename: '[id].chunk.js'
  },
}
{% endhighlight %}

Some basic setup, we'll be using the _development_ mode, because this is very much in development. In a later episode I'll tackle different modes. The devtool ensures our sourcemaps will be inline in the same file. This makes debugging a whole lot easier, because a minfied file doesn't help debugging.

As our entry file we use `./src/index.ts`, this file compiles the entire app in a working SPA, and will be named `main.js`.

We'll output our SPA into `./public_html/`. This folder is mounted in our nginx as the root for the SPA, this is why you had an 404 before we built the application.

{% highlight js %}
{
  module: {
    rules: [
      { test: /\.ts$/, loaders: ['awesome-typescript-loader'] },
      { test: /\.css$/, use: [{ loader: "style-loader" }, { loader: "css-loader" }] },
      { test: /\.scss$/, use: [{ loader: "style-loader" }, { loader: "css-loader" }, { loader: "sass-loader" }] },
      { test: /\.html$/, loader: 'html-loader' },
      { test: /\.(png|jpe?g|gif|ico)$/, loader: 'file-loader?name=assets/images/[name].[ext]' },
    ]
  },
}
{% endhighlight %}

This is where the webpack magic really happens. `{ test: /\.ts$/, loaders: ['awesome-typescript-loader'] },` tells webpack to use [awesome-typescript-loader](https://www.npmjs.com/package/awesome-typescript-loader) for every file that ends on `.ts`. This means that if you import a file in `index.ts` this will be loaded using the loader, and it will be packaged into a single javascript file.

But that's no different as using `tsc` for the bundling, where webpack really shines, is that it's a single bundler that can bundle all types of files, so you can use this line in `index.ts`: `import 'normalize.css/normalize.css';` to simply parse and add [normalize.css](https://necolas.github.io/normalize.css/) from your `node_modules`. And you can equally load a local [SASS](https://sass-lang.com/) file using `import './index.scss';`. this will execute sass and create a single CSS file to be loaded.

In your sass-file you can now simply use `@import` to load different sass-files and maintaining access to variables and mixins etc.

{% highlight js %}
{
  plugins: [
    new webpack.NamedModulesPlugin(),
    new HtmlWebpackPlugin({
      hash: true,
      template: path.resolve( __dirname, './src/index.ejs' ),
      inject: 'head',
      minify: {collapseWhitespace: true},
    }),
    new FaviconsWebpackPlugin({
      logo: './icon.png',
      prefix: 'icons-[hash]/',
      emitStats: false,
      statsFilename: 'iconstats-[hash].json',
      persistentCache: true,
      inject: true,
      background: '#fff',
      icons: {
        android: true,
        appleIcon: true,
        appleStartup: true,
        coast: false,
        favicons: true,
        firefox: true,
        opengraph: false,
        twitter: false,
        yandex: false,
        windows: true
      }
    })
  ]
}
{% endhighlight %}

In webpack you can also incorporate plugins to make your life easier. I've gone and installed 3.

* **NamedModulesPlugin**: This is only added for development reasons, what this does is show module-names in the build-log, instead of indexes.
* **HtmlWebpackPlugin**: By adding this plugin we get some control over how webpack should render the index.html. We've even specified a template.
* **FaviconsWebpackPlugin**: This is not very important, but by adding this, our application will have different types of icons for different services.

#### Typescript
Typescript is an open-source programming language developed and maintained by Microsoft. It is a strict syntactical superset of Javascript, and adds optional static typing to the language.

I like typescript, it makes javascript like a real OOP language, which I prefer over prototypal inheritance. There's loads of people who don't agree with that preference.

But for now, let's simply go over the setup.

{% highlight json %}
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "target": "ES5",
    "lib": [ "es2017", "dom" ],
    "module": "commonjs",
    "moduleResolution": "node",
    "removeComments": true,
    "emitDecoratorMetadata": true,
    "experimentalDecorators": true
  },
}
{% endhighlight %}

Let's go over the [compiler options](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/compiler-options.html):

* **target**: We want our compiled javascript to target [ES5](https://caniuse.com/#search=es5) this will work for nearly every user out there, except for some dinosaurs who still use IE8. And to be fair, I'm quite certain that people who use IE8 won't be using this state of the art chat application.
* **lib**: Included in our build is the ES2017 library, and the DOM library. If we were to omit this, Webpack would load by default `ES5`, `DOM` and `ScriptHost`.
* **module**: We want to use `CommonJS`
* **removeComments**: Kind of explains itself
* **emitDecoratorMetadata**: This will allow us to create decorators, and apply them using comments.
* **experimentalDecorators**: Enables experimental support for ES decorators.

{% highlight json %}
{
  "exclude": [
    "node_modules/*"
  ],
  "include": [
    "./src/**/*.ts",
  ],
}
{% endhighlight %}
Quite simply tells typescript not to look into `node_modules/`, but to check into `src/` for typescript files.

{% highlight json %}
{
  "compileOnSave": false,
  "buildOnSave": false
}
{% endhighlight %}
We don't want to compile our typescript files on save, nor do we want them to build on save.

## Conclusion
In this episode we've gone through the basic setup, and have now a simple static HTML webpage that sort of looks like a chat-application.

This might have been too easy for you, or too hard, depending on your skill level. If these technologies are very new to you, I'd suggest to take some tutorials on how these work, or you can simply use this working setup, and continue following these series.

Since this is my first ever tutorial, I wasn't to certain of how to proceed. Please leave a comment if you thought this was useless, and let me know how I can improve the series.